feat: Add Vaadin 23 Portlet documentation (#1358)
vaadin/docs: articles/flow/integrations/portlet/creating-vaadin-portlets.asciidoc

---
title: Creating Vaadin Portlets
order: 2
description: Instructs the reader on how to build their own Vaadin Portlets and how to run it
layout: page
page-links:
  - https://github.com/vaadin/portlet[GitHub]
---

= Creating Vaadin Portlets

In this chapter we will learn how to create Vaadin Portlets and how to deploy those portlets to https://liferay.com/products/dxp[Liferay 7 Digital Experience Platform].

== Creating a Vaadin Portlet

We have two ways to start the creation of our Vaadin Portlet: starting from scratch or from https://github.com/vaadin/base-starter-flow-portlet[base-starter-flow-portlet] project.
The starter project contains everything needed to quickly create your own Vaadin Portlet, with the code laid out in advance.

> In order to become familiar with setting up a Vaadin Portlet project manually, we will start with a simple Vaadin project and convert it into a Vaadin Portlet project below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to become familiar with setting up a Vaadin Portlet project manually, we will start with a simple Vaadin project and then convert it into a Vaadin Portlet project.
```

=== Setting Up Portlet Project

> First, download https://github.com/vaadin/skeleton-starter-flow/tree/v14/[Vaadin base starter]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, download the https://github.com/vaadin/skeleton-starter-flow/tree/v14/[Vaadin base starter]
```

> Next, update your pom.xml:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, update your [filename]#pom.xml#:
```

. Add the following dependencies:
+
.pom.xml additions
[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.vaadin</groupId>
    <artifactId>vaadin-portlet</artifactId>
    <version>1.0.0</version>
</dependency>
----
+
[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>javax.portlet</groupId>
    <artifactId>portlet-api</artifactId>
    <version>3.0.1</version>
    <scope>provided</scope>
</dependency>
----

. Add `build-frontend` goal to `vaadin-maven-plugin` as Vaadin Portlet does not work in development mode running webpack-dev-server.

=== Creating the Portlet

In the most basic setup, Vaadin Portlets consist of two classes:

> * A **portlet class**, which extends  `VaadinLiferayPortlet` or `VaadinPortlet` (when running in non-Liferay Portal)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A **portlet class**, which extends  [classname]`VaadinLiferayPortlet` or [classname]`VaadinPortlet` (when running in non-Liferay Portal)
```

The portlet class acts as the entry point for our Vaadin Portlet application.

> It serves a similar function to a Servlet, but in portlet context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It serves a similar function to a Servlet, but in a portlet context.
```

> * A portlet **view class**, which extends `Component`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A portlet **view class**, which extends [classname]`Component`
```

> The view class, that can be any normal Vaadin component, contains the contents of our Vaadin Portlet.
> You could use an existing component through extension, composition, or as-is.
> Or just create an entirely new component for your Vaadin Portlet.
> `VaadinPortlet` and `VaadinLiferayPortlet` are a generic classes and take the selected view class as a type parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The view class, which can be any normal Vaadin component, contains the contents of our Vaadin Portlet.
You could use an existing component through extension, composition, or as is.
Or just create an entirely new component for your Vaadin Portlet.
[classname]`VaadinPortlet` and [classname]`VaadinLiferayPortlet` are generic classes and take the selected view class as a type parameter.
```

==== Preparing the Classes

> Find the `MainView.java` provided with the project and create `MyPortlet.java` in the same folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Find the [filename]#MainView.java# provided with the project and create [filename]#MyPortlet.java# in the same folder.
```

Inside the file, add the following code:

MyLiferayPortlet.java for Liferay Portals
[source,java]
----
@PortletConfiguration(
    portletName = "MyLiferayPortlet",
    dependencies = @Dependency(name = "PortletHub", scope = "javax.portlet", version = "3.0.0")
)
public class MyLiferayPortlet extends VaadinLiferayPortlet<MainView> {

}
----

MyPortlet.java for non-Liferay Portals
[source,java]
----
public class MyPortlet extends VaadinPortlet<MainView> {

}
----

Next, open the `MainView.java`.

> Remove both the `@Route` and `@PWA` annotations - those do not make sense for our portlet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remove both the [annotationname]`@Route` and [annotationname]`@PWA` annotations, which do not make sense for our portlet.
```

The final code should look something like this:

.MainView.java
[source,java]
----
public class MainView extends VerticalLayout {

    public MainView() {
        Button button = new Button("Click me",
                event -> Notification.show("Clicked!"));
        add(button);
    }
}
----

When a user clicks on the button, a notification with the text "Clicked!" should appear then the lower left corner of the browser window.

> Your Vaadin Portlet is almost ready to go - we only need to make it ready for deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your Vaadin Portlet is almost ready to go; we only need to make it ready for deployment.
```

=== Setting Portlet Deployment Descriptor

> In Portlet 3.0 specification portlet deployment descriptor can be configured in two ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Portlet 3.0 specification, the portlet deployment descriptor can be configured in two ways:
```

- portlet.xml (backwards compatible)
- Annotations (only 3.0)

> We will use the portlet.xml to configure our portlet deployment.
> The portlet.xml serves the same purpose as web.xml does for servlets.
> 
> Create portlet.xml under `{project directory}/src/main/webapp/WEB-INF` and
> add the following contents:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will use the [filename]#portlet.xml# to configure our portlet deployment.
The [filename]#portlet.xml# serves the same purpose as [filename]#web.xml# does for servlets.

Create [filename]#portlet.xml# under `{project directory}/src/main/webapp/WEB-INF` and add the following contents:
```

.portlet.xml
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<portlet-app xmlns="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/portlet"
             xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
             xsi:schemaLocation="http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/portlet http://xmlns.jcp.org/xml/ns/portlet/portlet-app_3_0.xsd"
             version="3.0">
    <portlet>
        <portlet-name>MyLiferayPortlet</portlet-name>
        <display-name>MyLiferayPortlet</display-name>
        <portlet-class>org.vaadin.example.MyPortlet</portlet-class>
        <expiration-cache>0</expiration-cache>
        <supports>
            <mime-type>text/html</mime-type>
            <portlet-mode>view</portlet-mode>
        </supports>
        <portlet-info>
            <title>My Test Portlet - MyPortlet</title>
            <short-title>My Test Portlet</short-title>
            <keywords></keywords>
        </portlet-info>
    </portlet>
</portlet-app>
----

> The `<portlet-class>` points to your class extending `VaadinPortlet`/`VaadinLiferayPortlet` with a fully qualified name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `<portlet-class>` points to your class extending [classname]`VaadinPortlet`/[classname]`VaadinLiferayPortlet` with a fully qualified name.
```

The `<supports>` section contains the portlet modes (`<portlet-mode>` tag) the portlet supports.

> You can learn more about portlet modes for Vaadin Portlet in
> <<handling-portlet-phases.asciidoc#,the next chapter>>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can learn more about portlet modes for Vaadin Portlet in <<handling-portlet-phases.asciidoc#,the next chapter>>
```

> === Setting Portlet Descriptors Specific for Liferay

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Setting Portlet Descriptors Specific to Liferay
```

To run Vaadin Portlets in Liferay Portal the following descriptors are also needed:

> - `liferay-display.xml` - describes the category the portlet appears under in the `Add` menu of the Liferay's Widgets bar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `liferay-display.xml` - describes the category the portlet appears under in the `Add` menu of Liferay's Widgets bar.
```

- `liferay-portlet.xml` - describes Liferay-specific enhancements for JSR-286 portlets installed on a Liferay Portal server.

Create liferay-display.xml and liferay-portlet.xml under `{project directory}/src/main/webapp/WEB-INF` and add the following contents:

.liferay-display.xml
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE display PUBLIC "-//Liferay//DTD Display 6.2.0//EN" "http://www.liferay.com/dtd/liferay-display_6_2_0.dtd">

<display>
    <category name="Vaadin Liferay Portlets">
        <portlet id="MyLiferayPortlet" />
    </category>
</display>
----

.liferay-portlet.xml
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE liferay-portlet-app PUBLIC "-//Liferay//DTD Portlet Application 7.1.0//EN" "http://www.liferay.com/dtd/liferay-portlet-app_7_1_0.dtd">

<liferay-portlet-app>
    <portlet>
        <portlet-name>MyLiferayPortlet</portlet-name>
        <!-- Instanceable parameter means whether we can add the Portlet more than once on same page.-->
        <instanceable>false</instanceable>
    </portlet>
</liferay-portlet-app>
----
[NOTE]

> `instanceable` parameter means whether the Portlet can be added more than once on same page. If `false`, then it can be added only once on a page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The parameter `instanceable` specifies whether the Portlet can be added more than once on same page.
If it is `false`, it can be added only once on a page.
```

=== Setting External Stats URL for Liferay

> If your portlet runs in *Liferay Portal*, add the following resource file `flow-build-info.json` into `{project directory}/src/main/resources/META-INF/VAADIN/config` with the contents:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your portlet runs in *Liferay Portal*, add the following resource file [filename]#flow-build-info.json# into `{project directory}/src/main/resources/META-INF/VAADIN/config` with the contents:
```

> .flow-build-info.json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.[filename]#flow-build-info.json#
```

                        <!-- Include all files and folders below <directory> -->
                        <includes>
                            <include>**</include>
                        </includes>
                        <!-- do not include configuration files -->
                        <excludes>
                            <exclude>VAADIN/config/**</exclude>
                        </excludes>
                    </resource>
                </webResources>
            </configuration>
        </execution>
        <!-- Generate the portlet war excluding any static build files -->
        <execution>
            <id>portlet-war</id>
            <goals>
                <goal>war</goal>
            </goals>
            <configuration>
                <primaryArtifact>true</primaryArtifact>
                <packagingExcludes>WEB-INF/classes/META-INF/VAADIN/build/**,VAADIN/</packagingExcludes>
            </configuration>
        </execution>
    </executions>
</plugin>
----

Here we build 2 war files one for the application (all portlets in this project) and one for the static files needed by the portlets (this contains frontend bundle and client engine).

> The static war is built as a portal window can only load a single Vaadin bundle and client engine at a time. With this all the portlets on the page can in a simple way use the same static bundle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The static `WAR` is built as a portal window that can only load a single Vaadin bundle and client engine at a time.
This provides a simple way for all the portlets on the page to use the same static bundle.
```

==== Configuring Static Resources

> If you need to change the name of the static assets war (`vaadin-portlet-static` as default), you can do that via `vaadin.portlet.static.resources.mapping` application property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need to change the name of the static assets `WAR` (by default, `vaadin-portlet-static`), you can do this via the `vaadin.portlet.static.resources.mapping` application property.
```

For example, if you would like to serve static resources from `vaadin-static-resources.war`, you will need to +

> * Rename static war to `vaadin-static-resources` in the pom.xml
> * Rename static portlet name in `flow-build-info.json` (if Liferay is used)
> * Pass the value `/vaadin-static-resources/` (for *Liferay Portal*, it would be `/o/vaadin-portlet-resources/`) via the application property to the Vaadin application, that is, on Tomcat web server you would:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* rename the static `WAR` to `vaadin-static-resources` in the [filename]#pom.xml#;
* change the static portlet name in [filename]#flow-build-info.json# (if Liferay is used);
* pass the value `/vaadin-static-resources/` (for *Liferay Portal*, it would be `/o/vaadin-portlet-resources/`) via the application property to the Vaadin application; that is, on Tomcat web server you would:
```

** On *nix-based operating systems, create or edit the file `$CATALINA_BASE/bin/setenv.sh` with the line +
`JAVA_OPTS="$JAVA_OPTS -Dvaadin.portlet.static.resources.mapping=/vaadin-static-resources/"`
** On Windows operating systems, create or edit the file `%CATALINA_BASE%\bin\setenv.bat` with the line +
`set "JAVA_OPTS=%JAVA_OPTS% -Dvaadin.portlet.static.resources.mapping=/vaadin-static-resources/"`

=== Deploying Vaadin Portlet to Liferay 7

. Run `mvn install` in your project directory.
. Download https://github.com/liferay/liferay-portal/releases[Liferay Bundle] and extract it to a location you prefer.

> . Add the following parameter to the Liferay Tomcat's setenv.sh (`{liferay home}/tomcat-<version>/bin`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Add the following parameter to Liferay Tomcat's [filename]#setenv.sh# (`{liferay home}/tomcat-<version>/bin`):
```

`-Dvaadin.portlet.static.resources.mapping=/o/vaadin-portlet-static/`
. Download and copy the JNA dependency JARs of a certain version into `{liferay home}/tomcat-<version>/webapps/ROOT/WEB-INF/lib` (or `shielded-container-lib` depending on the version): https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/net.java.dev.jna/jna/5.7.0[net.java.dev.jna:jna:5.7.0], https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/net.java.dev.jna/jna-platform/5.7.0[net.java.dev.jna:jna-platform:5.7.0].

> This is needed because Vaadin Portlet uses a newer version of JNA library and this can cause a conflicts with that version Liferay uses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is needed because Vaadin Portlet uses a newer version of the JNA library which can cause conflicts with the version that Liferay uses.
```

> . Create "portal-ext.properties" file in Liferay's home directory and place the following property there: `javascript.single.page.application.enabled=false`.
> . Copy both `*.war` files from `{project directory}/target` into `{liferay home}/deploy`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a [filename]#portal-ext.properties# file in Liferay's home directory and place the following property there: `javascript.single.page.application.enabled=false`.
. Copy both `WAR` files from `{project directory}/target` into `{liferay home}/deploy`.
```

. Start the web server by

> * Opening a command prompt in the `{bundle extract directory}` folder
> * Running the command `./{tomcat-version}/bin/startup.sh` or `./{tomcat-version}/bin/startup.bat` (unix/windows)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* opening a command prompt in the `{bundle extract directory}` folder;
* running the command `./{tomcat-version}/bin/startup.sh` or `./{tomcat-version}/bin/startup.bat` (Unix/Windows).
```

. Once the web server has started, navigate to http://localhost:8080/

> . Follow the instructions of Liferay Wizard to set up a new user and sign in to the Portal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Follow the instructions of the Liferay wizard to set up a new user and sign in to the Portal.
```

> . Click on "Menu" button on the left top corner to open the menu console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click on the "Menu" button at the top-left corner to open the menu console.
```

. Find and click on the "Page tree" link and click on "+" button to add a new page.
. Select "Widget Page", give it a name and select appropriate layout.
. In the "Look and Feel" tab select "Define a specific look and feel for this page" and enable "Show Maximize/Minimize".

> . Click "Save" and navigate to home page, then to the layout you just created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click "Save" and navigate to the home page, then to the layout you just created.
```

. Click "Add" button which is usually placed in the top right corner, find category "Vaadin Liferay Portlets", open it and drag-and-drop portlet item from the panel to the page.

> . You should see the portlet with title "MY TEST PORTLET - MYPORTLET" and "Click me" button in the content area.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. You should see the portlet with the title "MY TEST PORTLET - MYPORTLET" and a "Click me" button in the content area.
```
